Developing a Global Map of Dust PM 2.5
A research brief on the work of Mustafa Zahid, written by Evan Lingo



   Introduction

       In 2024, UNICEF reported that air pollution accounted for 8.1 million
   deaths globally, surpassing tobacco and poor diets to become the world’s
   second leading risk factor for death (“Air Pollution”). PM 2.5, a broad category
   of air pollution encompassing all particles less than 2.5 micrometers across,
   represents the most dangerous culprit (“State of Global Air”). Because of their
   small size, these fine airborne particles can make it past more of the body’s
   natural defenses. Prolonged exposure can disrupt the healthy functioning of
   the lungs and the connected blood vessels, increasing the risk of life-
   threatening complications (Henning).

        The types of pollutants that contribute to PM 2.5 vary by region. In arid
   parts of the world, such as the Middle East, North Africa, and multiple regions
   of Asia, one of the major contributors to air pollution is desert dust (Li et al.).
   However, most devices used to measure PM 2.5 can’t determine much about
   its composition without additional specialized sensors (Pan et al.). In other
   words, most monitors can’t tell the difference between smokestack soot and
   desert dust. To better understand how much dust is contributing to fine-
   particle air pollution across different parts of the world, this research aims to
   develop a global map of PM 2.5 pollution coming from dust.




   Methodology

      This study aims to estimate the amount of dust PM 2.5 in the air without
   measuring it directly. This will be done in two steps. First, training a model to
   learn what PM 2.5 levels typically look like on days without much dust.
   Second, using that model to guess what the PM 2.5 levels would have looked
   like on dusty days if they hadn’t been so dusty. The difference between the
   predicted non-dusty PM 2.5 and the actual PM 2.5 observed on those dusty
   days should be the amount of extra PM 2.5 contributed by the dust. The rest
   of this section will explain this methodology in more detail.
Stage One Model

    Before the stage one model can be trained, dust days must be separated
from non-dust days. This is done primarily using satellite imagery, which can
be analyzed to produce quantitative measurements of how much dust is in
the air over a given region at a given time. Days with low observed dust are set
aside to be used for training the stage one model.

     From here, the stage one model is trained to predict the PM 2.5 levels that
a given monitor would read at a given time. It does this using the location of
the monitor and information about the environmental conditions at that
location and point in time, such as local wind speed, temperature, and rainfall.
Importantly, the stage one model does not receive any information about dust
levels and is only trained on data from non-dusty days. The model is trained
to factor all relevant information into its PM 2.5 predictions except for dust.

    The model is then used to predict PM 2.5 readings on dusty days. Because
the model does not know anything about how dust contributes to PM 2.5, it
should predict what the PM 2.5 would have looked like in that exact same time
and place if it were not dusty. Taking the difference between this prediction
and the actual PM 2.5 on that dusty day will give us an estimate of the extra
PM 2.5 that was present because the day was indeed dusty. This will serve as
the estimate of dust’s contribution to total PM 2.5 in that time and place.

Stage Two Model

    These dust contribution estimates can then be fed alongside
environmental and geographic data into a second model of the same general
design. This stage two model will be refined to predict the extra PM 2.5 coming
from dust for any place in the world (given its location and environmental
data). This model is indeed trained with knowledge of atmospheric dust levels
(based on satellite data), and the result is a global map estimating the PM 2.5
contributed by dust at any time and place contained in the input data.
Applications

    A map of global PM 2.5 from dust could offer important insights into
various questions. For example, this study intends to use the resulting data to
investigate the relationship between dust PM 2.5 exposure and mortality. If a
strong correlation is uncovered, it would offer a compelling argument for
policymakers to invest in more aggressive means of protecting their citizens
from fine-particulate dust exposure, especially in areas prone to dust storms.

    These data could also be used to evaluate the effectiveness of various
dust protection measures. One such measure is afforestation, which aims to
reduce dust pollution by planting vegetation around large sources of airborne
dust, ideally containing the particulate matter. Given time, this study also
intends to use these data to estimate the effectiveness of China’s Great Green
Wall program on containing the spread of dust PM 2.5. If the analysis supports
the efficacy of the program, it could become a model for other regions
attempting to reduce the dust exposure facing their population. However, if
the data show that fine-particulate dust isn’t effectively contained by
vegetation, it could warrant additional protective actions, such as air-filter
subsidies, in order to address these fine particles through other means.
Works Cited

“Air Pollution Accounted for 8.1 Million Deaths Globally in 2021, Becoming the

Second Leading Risk Factor for Death, Including for Children under Five

Years.” UNICEF, 18 June 2024, https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/air-

pollution-accounted-81-million-deaths-globally-2021-becoming-second-

leading-risk.


Henning, Robert J. “Particulate Matter Air Pollution Is a Significant Risk Factor

for Cardiovascular Disease.” Current Problems in Cardiology, vol. 49, nos. 1,

Part B, Jan. 2024, p. 102094. ScienceDirect,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2023.102094.


Li, Tiantian, et al. “Sand and Dust Storms: A Growing Global Health Threat
Calls for International Health Studies to Support Policy Action.” The Lancet.
Planetary Health, vol. 9, no. 1, Jan. 2025, pp. e34–40. PubMed Central,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(24)00308-5.


Pan, Susu, et al. “Recent Developments in the Determination of PM2.5
Chemical Composition.” Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and
Toxicology, vol. 108, no. 5, 2022, pp. 819–23. PubMed Central,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-022-03510-w.


“State of Global Air.” Stateofglobalair.org, www.stateofglobalair.org/pollution-

sources/pm25. Accessed 9 Apr. 2026.
